


Nicolaus (II) Bernoulli





Quick Info
Born

      6 February 1695
      

        Basel, Switzerland
        

Died

      31 July 1726
      
      St Petersburg, Russia
    

Summary
Nicolaus (II) Bernoulli was the favourite of three sons of Johann Bernoulli. He made important mathematical contributions to the problem of trajectories while working on the mathematical arguments behind the dispute between Newton and Leibniz.





    View one larger picture





Biography
Nicolaus (II) Bernoulli was the favourite of three sons of Johann Bernoulli. He entered the University of Basel when only 13 years of age and, like many other members of his family, studied both mathematics and law. In 1715 he became a licentiate in jurisprudence.


Nicolaus worked as his father's assistant helping him with correspondence. In particular he was involved with writing letters concerning the famous priority dispute between Newton and Leibniz. He not only replied to Taylor regarding the dispute but he also made important mathematical contributions to the problem of trajectories while working on the mathematical arguments behind the dispute.


Nicolaus worked on curves, differential equations and probability. He died only 8 months after taking up an appointment in St Petersburg at a young age when his talents promised so much for the future. Fleckstein writes in [1]:-
With his brother Daniel he travelled in France and Italy, where both received appointments to the St Petersburg Academy. Within a year, however, he contracted and died of a hectic fever.






Other Mathematicians born in Switzerland

A Poster of Nicolaus (II) Bernoulli





References (show)





J O Fleckenstein, Biography in Dictionary of Scientific Biography (New York 1970-1990). See THIS LINK.
H Bernhard, The Bernoulli family, in H Wussing and W Arnold, Biographien bedeutender Mathematiker (Berlin, 1983).
V A Nikiforovskii, The great mathematicians Bernoulli (Russian), History of Science and Technology Nauka' (Moscow, 1984).
M Hürlimann (ed.), Die Mathematikerfamilie Bernoulli, Grosse Schweizer (Zürich, 1942), 112-119.
A P Yushkevich, Nikolas Bernoulli and the publication of 'Ars conjectandi' by Jacob Bernoulli (Russian), Teor. Veroyatnost. i Primenen. 31 (2) (1986), 333-352.






Additional Resources (show)




Other pages about Nicolaus (II) Bernoulli:

Bernoulli family tree



Other websites about Nicolaus (II) Bernoulli:

Dictionary of Scientific Biography
MathSciNet Author profile
zbMATH entry






Cross-references (show)





History Topics: The fundamental theorem of algebra






    Written by J J O'Connor and E F Robertson

    Last Update October 1997
  


